PEP 777: How to Re-invent the Wheel (#4036)
python/peps: peps/pep-0777/appendix-pypi-download-analysis.rst

:orphan:

.. _777-pypi-download-analysis:

Appendix: Analysis of Installer Usage on PyPI
=============================================

.. note::
    This analysis is not perfect. While it uses the best available data,
    mirrors, caches used by enterprises, and other confounding factors
    could affect the numbers in this analysis. Consider the numbers as trends
    rather than concrete reliable figures.

> One pertinent question to PEP 777 is how frequently Python users update their

Reviewer: Useful to link back:
```suggestion
One pertinent question to :pep:`777` is how frequently Python users update their
```

installer. If users update quite frequently, compatibility concerns are not as
important; users will be up-to-date by the time new features get added. On the
other hand, if users are frequently using older installers, then incompatible
wheels on PyPI would have a much wider impact. To figure out the relative share
of up-to-date vs outdated installers, we can use PyPI download statistics.

PyPI publishes a `BigQuery dataset <https://console.cloud.google.com/marketplace/product/gcp-public-data-pypi/pypi>`_,
which contains information about each download PyPI receives, including
installer name and version when available. The following query was used to

> collect the data for this analysis::

Reviewer: Syntax highlighting:
```suggestion
collect the data for this analysis:

.. code-block:: sql
```

    #standardSQL
    SELECT
      details.installer.name as installer_name,
      details.installer.version as installer_version,
      COUNT(*) as num_downloads,
    FROM `bigquery-public-data.pypi.file_downloads`
    WHERE
      -- Only query the last 6 months of data
      DATE(timestamp)
        BETWEEN DATE_TRUNC(DATE_SUB(CURRENT_DATE(), INTERVAL 6 MONTH), MONTH)
        AND CURRENT_DATE()
    GROUP BY `installer_name`, `installer_version`
    ORDER BY `num_downloads` DESC

With the raw data available, we can start investigating how up-to-date
installers that download packages from PyPI are. The below chart shows the
breakdown by installer name of all downloads on PyPI for the six month period
from March 10, 2024 to September 10, 2024.

> .. image:: appendix-dl-by-installer.png
>   :width: 600
>   :alt: A pie chart breaking down PyPI downloads by installer

Reviewer: This isn't too readable in dark mode:

<img width="807" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/08f945d2-b661-46bb-a66d-0304718c77f4">

We have some CSS to help:

```suggestion
.. image:: appendix-dl-by-installer.png
  :class: invert-in-dark-mode
  :width: 600
  :alt: A pie chart breaking down PyPI downloads by installer
```

Author: Ah, great!

>   :alt: A pie chart breaking down PyPI downloads by installer

Reviewer: Thanks for including alt text! The prose text afterwards expands a bit on it, but please could you extend the alt text a bit? Doesn't have to be exhaustive but include some pertinent info. Maybe include the pip proportion, and perhaps one or two more.

Author: Sure thing, wasn't sure if it was worth it to duplicate prose I'd include below, but I think it makes sense.

Reviewer: Yeah, it's good to avoid the duplicating text if possible.

Some general advice: https://accessibility.huit.harvard.edu/describe-content-images

Author: Hopefully the new text seems better? I think it is important readers who use the alt-text still get the data about the breakdowns. The prose talks about trends but I think the individual numbers are important context.

Reviewer: Looks good, thank you!

As can be seen above, ``pip`` is the most popular installer in this time frame.
For simplicity's sake, this analysis will focus on ``pip`` installations when
considering how up-to-date installers are. ``pip`` has existed for a long
time, so analyzing the version of ``pip`` used to download packages should
provide an idea of how frequently users update their installers. Below is a
chart breaking down installations in PyPI over the same six month period, now
grouped by pip installer major version. ``pip`` uses calendar versioning, so
an installation from ``pip`` 20.x means that the user has not updated their pip
in four years.

> .. image:: appendix-dl-by-pip-version.png

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. image:: appendix-dl-by-pip-version.png
  :class: invert-in-dark-mode
```

  :width: 600

>   :alt: A pie chart breaking down PyPI downloads by pip major version

Reviewer: Maybe this doesn't need extending because the prose covers the general trend? Or maybe include some numbers for the bigger slices.

Over two thirds of users currently run ``pip`` from this year or last. However,

> about 7% are on a version that is four years or older(!). This indicates that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
about 7% are on a version that is at least four years old(!). This indicates that
```
